---
title: The Forgotten City Review
description: A consise, philosophical adventure into a draconian utopia that caters to history and mythology nerds like me particularly well. Flawed it may be, it is still an unforgettable experience.

draft: true
section: Essays
tags:
  - post
  - game-review
  - nerds-rejoice
---

When I first heard _The Forgotten City's_ premise of a time loop mystery game in
an underground Roman city with a mysterious failure condition that you have to
figure out and put a stop to, I internally anticipated an unholy union between
_Twelve Minutes_ and _Assassin's Creed Origins_.

I mean, what's with time loop puzzle games and the year of 2021? _Twelve
Minutes_, _Deathloop_, _Returnal_, ...is that what COVID does to infect the
psyche of the entire video game industry? I couldn't push myself away from
making comparisons, you see, and after witnessing the car-crash-fascinating
trainwreck fire that is _Twelve Minutes'_ plot, I couldn't have had high hopes
for recent time loop games until something truly brilliant and unique comes out.

And that's where _The Forgotten City_ shines. It explores topics in philosophy,
mythology, history, anthropology and culture that are getting increasingly
sidelined in video games, triple-A or indie. More and more people treat period
settings as mere backdrops for exotic adventures in a different time and space,
but they are so much more than that. Culture, ideology, mindset, thought
processes -- they are all things that cannot be depicted if you solely imitate
the sights and sounds and scenery and semblances, and not touch on the minds of
the humans that belong to this era. The experience was definitely elevated by
the dedication to stay true to historical facts and events, which are
surprisingly critical to the plot and how the game plays.

It's been a while since my history nerd brain has been activated in a video
game. Let's dive right in.

# Presentation

## Visuals

_The Forgotten City_ is a very visually appealing game. Or, at least I think so.
It's not so graphically intensive as to slow down my RTX 2060 Super or anything
-- although at the default Ultra settings it does stutter a lot especially
during scene transitions -- and it's not like graphical fidelity is the central
selling point, unlike modern triple-A games that demand so much GPU power that
plebs like me can't even enjoy them at their best. For a game to look good, you
don't need ray-tracing, you don't need volumetric light, you don't need DLSS,
and you don't need to turn your computer into a space heater.

Part of why I think this game looks so appealing is its environmental level
design. It's a city at the center of an insurmountable mountain, so naturally
all the sunlight the city bathes in comes from the opening at the crux of the
mountain. But, the sunlight only hits the luxurious marble-white villas and
temples near the Forum, enhancing the contrast with the cliff-side slums made of
mud bricks, where there are only torches and oil lamps trying to make the
commoners' daily lives a little bit less miserable.

It's an idyllic utopia on the outside, and a citadel of tyranny on the inside --
an _environmental_ metaphor for the state of the city.

There are also underground sections where you have to explore caverns,
underground cisterns and pathways into darkness behind seemingly mundane
locations. They make you anxious and ponder what's going to appear at every
twist and turn, but they never quite reach pitch darkness. This makes me feel a
lot less unnerved compared to some other games, which is a double-edged sword.

I like when games permit you to relax a little while uncovering the truth,
especially in a non-horror game, but that comes at the cost of reducing the
oppressive and unknown atmosphere. It's a personal preference thing, and I can
sense the dev team probably has the same preference as I do, when it comes to
horror elements. (We'll circle back to this later.)

## Animations

Now, I have to say that for a game of this size and budget, opting for fully 3D,
animated, voice-acted dialogue in a dialogue-heavy game is a challenging choice,
and I appreciate the developers' efforts. But the facial animations triggered
the same kind of uncanny valley effect I felt when I was playing _Fallout: New
Vegas_, which is a game more than a decade old now, except even worse because
all the facial textures and features are remarkably detailed and life-like now.
I would've probably said this as a nitpick, if I hadn't encountered more
animation issues in the game.

During one optional (we'll circle back to this later) section of the game,
you'll learn how to mount over ledges. And whenever you do that, it looks like
you just glided up the ledge without any effort or even reaching out to the top
of the ledge with your hands. What's worse, is that you can glide up a ledge
even with something in your hand, which looks _utterly ludicrous_ and suggests
that you don't need your hands to climb at all. Accidental superhuman powers!

Yeah, this game could do with some more polishing for character animations. I
don't think it's that hard if the devs commit to it, but I doubt it. That's
hardly the focus, after all.

## Music and Soundscape

The music and sound design of _The Forgotten City_ is, to put it simply,
stellar. There are multiple tracks that could play in the city as you're walking
around and resolving the mystery of the Golden Rule, and each one imparts a
grave, mysterious tone that goes perfectly with the game.

Whenever someone breaks the Golden Rule, the track
["We Are But Dust And Shadow"](https://youtu.be/vXHqYBXQhSk?t=910) suddenly
rolls in with deep and looming drums, as if they were bolts of lightning hitting
the ground. As your vision suddenly turns black and white, save for the
reanimated golden statues, the Thunderous Voice angrily proclaims that, again,
_the many shall suffer for the sins of one_. HURRY! RUN! YOU SCREWED UP! It's
such a succinct musical portrayal of doom and gloom and getting up your ass and
start running.

# Gameplay

Even though the city itself is minuscule, the variety is high and exploration
alone should trigger your interest in the setting and the daily lives of the
citizens. You'll find all sorts of graffiti, papyri and inscriptions that
directly tell you what's on people's minds, which is extra potent if you choose
to play as the Archaeologist as you will have a lot more insight and knowledge
of inscriptions, texts and random artifacts. (In other words, perfect for a nerd
like me.)

On top of that, what objects you find seem very true to the setting. In the
game, you'll find a lot of produce bowls, and the game will explain that the
Romans ate purple carrots because the familiar orange cultivar didn't exist in
the time period. The game will spend time telling you if a vase is Greek made,
and that the jugs of wine you're holding are called _amphorae_.

You'll find _lararia_ (singular: _lararium_), small household shrines for
praying, next to all Roman homes. You'll find garum and loaves of bread styled
after the _panis quadratus_ uncovered from the ruins of Pompeii and Herculaneum.
You'll find open brewing vats of crude beer with some... questionable things
floating on top. (Crystal clear pale ale in a tavern in a Roman slum? Ha! Don't
be ridiculous.) You'll find vats of tyrian purple dye in the tailor's shop, with
a broad-striped _toga praetexta_ proudly on display.

All of these elements are beyond what I expected, knowing that the mainstream
depiction of Romans revolves solely around legionaries with big red banners, big
red shields, big scary swords and big heckin' noses, or around drama between
senators or members of the Imperial family.

It feels like a genuine, cordoned-off Roman town in the first century CE, with
all the right elements, and nothing feels out of place. Well, except for you.
And the utterly ridiculous amount of golden statues that can whisper to you
somehow. Oh, and they can twist their heads to stare at you. Scary!
