---
title: "The Struggle for Ataraxia"
description: "The more uncertain the times we live in may be, the more important it is for us to remain collected, unnerved, yet still able to face our challenges."
section: Life
tags:
  - post
  - philosophy
---

As of time of writing, it is understandably so that a lot of us are disturbed,
disillusioned, or even distraught as to what is happening to our world. It can
feel like the world is going insane, going out of our control, and we'll all be
put in camps and be slowly yet surely subjected to genocide, because some old,
white, American men blame us, who are merely striving to have the free rein to
be ourselves, for the crumbling of society, which was already doomed to fail in
their hands, because of the unsustainable nature of the capitalist, exploitative
order they had themselves crafted and propagated.

But it is precisely at this historical moment, a moment that we did not
volunteer to exist in, that we must remain steadfast in our beliefs, and not to
be overridden with fear; for fear and anger is precisely the emotions our
adversaries wish to impart on us, to make us fall in disarray and direct our
anger at ourselves, so that we, the detractors, may dissolve spontaneously while
they passively observe the world go down with us without a fight, without a
struggle for our voices to be heard.

It's incredibly easy to feel emotional. Everyone would be emotionally affected
to some degree at the misery and suffering happening all across the globe. What
is important to let it become our strength and not our weakness. It is important
to not let the anger and pressure be directed at _ourselves_, but at the people
who caused us to feel miserable, who caused us to feel caged and hated, and as
if we don't belong in this world, and we should just give up on our goals, our
ideals, or even our lives.

To do that is to yield to those who wish us dead, those who wish to silence us.

---

Now, I'm a programmer, and someone who loves the free and open-source software
movement. And anyone who loves FOSS would know, there had already been too many
tragedies, too many controversies, too many needless exchanges of emotion that
in the end do not meaningfully change the status quo in any way. A default
strategy for many suffering under immense pressure and prejudice seems to have
developed, which is to generate as much outrage as possible in order to
instigate change.

While these attempts might have been successful at removing certain figureheads
from a community, changing the entire community takes concrete action, people
unified in a goal, and most importantly, time. It takes a while for your ideas,
your vision of how everything should be, to be accepted by everyone, should they
accept it at all.

One cannot simply assert that one's ideas are always right, and one cannot say
that anyone who disagrees is the devil incarnate. Demonizing people who you wish
to convince is not a viable way to achieve concord.

We need to express our dissent, our dissatisfaction with "it is how it is",
productively. No, not "professionally" — that is a venomous term tainted by the
corrective and coercive nature of white society. _Productively_. _Convincingly_.

In the end of the day, the purpose of any call to action is to convince people
to join your cause, to make them believe in what you believe in — it is
important to also realize that uncontrolled anger and outrage is also a source
of venom, that is infused into every word and sentence once writes. It's in the
wording, the sentence structure, the descriptions of everyone involved: the odor
of vitriol oozes out of the text on screen, akin to the scent of ink escaping
the confines of calligraphy.

And that vitriol burns. The mark you would leave on your readers is not
ideological enlightenment or a sense of one's purpose renewed, but rather the
distasteful char of embers and soot, the remnants of a raging fire that consumed
all that it touched, all those who got in its way, even those who had not been
the intended targets of hatred.

Hate burns all in its path, and does not help with spreading a message. Even a
message against hate from others can itself contain hate.

And it is vital to know how to see hate, to identify it as what it is, to know
when you are spreading hate, to know when you are about to release a fiery
outburst in the general direction of your object of hatred.

And to stop yourself from doing so.

---

In Stoic philosophy, there exists a term known as "apatheia" (ἀπάθεια):
literally, meaning without suffering. In these times, however, I would argue
that it is impossible to actually evade suffering. For many of us, pain and
suffering are in every step in our life, physical, mental, or psychological, and
to ignore suffering is to put oneself in a delirious state, to fool oneself into
thinking that what we have now is perfectly tolerable.

To ignore pain is to ignore why we are fighting against those causing us pain.

However, a complementary concept exists in other forms of philosophy, such as
"ataraxia" (ἀταραξία) in Epicurean philosphy, meaning "undisturbed" or
"unmoved", though we may be under constant assault and persecution. To remain
unmoved is to remain steadfast, to remain firm. Even if the world is out to get
us, we will stand our ground and continue to work to achieve our goals, knowing
full well of the challenges in front of us, without letting emotions steer us
into dangerous states of mind, without burning what could be our allies.

In a world slowly being consumed by violence and turmoil, to possess ataraxia is
to show one's strength against chaos and hatred, to stand up against the tide.

We need more people willing to stand up.
