---
title: "Metagames, and Gimmickery"
description: "Please, stop basing your metanarrative solely on gimmicks. You're sacrificing substance for superficiality."

section: Essays
tags:
  - post
  - game-design
  - metanarratives
---

**SPOILER WARNING**: There will be major spoilers for _Undertale_ and _OneShot_,
alongside minor spoilers for _Inscryption_ and _There Is No Game: Wrong
Dimension_. If you have not played these games, by all means please play them.
Play them _all_. Form your own opinion on these games, and then read what I have
to say. You'll find it much more impactful this way.

<hr style="border: 1px solid var(--color-brand)"/>

There's been a trend among the indie gaming scene, which is the increasing use
of metanarratives: while some are laughably primitive — for example, when a
character expresses the awareness that they're inside a video game (commonly
known as "the video game knows that it's a video game") — other forms of more
sophisticated metanarratives considerably enhance not only the gameplay
experience, but also the emotional or philosophical impact of the overall
narrative.

In my years of playing and experiencing indie video games, there are some uses
of a metanarrative or demonstrations of meta-awareness that were absolutely
_stellar_: _Undertale_, whose use of metanarrative techniques are so well-known
and well-received even among popular media, is a textbook example of a
metanarrative "done right" — through the use of detailed characterization and
dialogue from characters like Sans, whose initial aloofness is subtly punctuated
through moments of brilliance, that hint at him being far more intelligent and
aware of the situation than he chooses to show. Small clues and hints are
scattered like cookie crumbs throughout item descriptions, interactable objects,
or even the design of the levels themselves as a part of environmental
storytelling. Even a small scene like Sans facing the camera (and therefore, the
player) contributes to the feeling that he is _far_ more complex than he seems
to appear, which sets the _basis_ for an extended metanarrative that have been
hinted at throughout the adventure.

Perhaps most crucially, the game **withholds** the existence of the
metanarrative through most of the normal runtime for a first-time player. Sure,
everyone who has played through Undertale at least once will tell you that
Flowey eventually is revealed to be similarly cognizant of the player's
existence much like Sans in a very surprising twist, but it is not impossible to
piece together the puzzle even through a normal Neutral Route playthrough. Of
course, additional playthroughs through the True Pacifist and Genocide Routes
would much more significantly reveal the "meta", but by that point the player
has been thoroughly primed to be on the lookout for meta elements, and so the
increased inclusion of meta elements don't come off as forced or unusual.
**Metanarratives should be naturally integrated into the flow of gameplay.**

In other words, _Undertale_ is an example where the metanarrative is _connected_
to, yet still _independent_ from the main, non-meta narrative. You can enjoy
_Undertale_ as simply a story of a fallen human who had to survive the
monster-inhabited underground through whatever means they choose, the characters
and stories they come into contact with throughout the adventure, and the
interpersonal relationships that gradually develop and take the position as the
centerpiece as the adventure slowly unfolds. None of that "Flowey and Sans know
you, the player, exist", or "Chara is able to curse your copy of Undertale so
that you may never get the True Pacifist ending ever again" stuff that comes
when you dig deeper. **The metanarrative should be a condiment that enhances the
entrée that is the primary narrative, and the primary narrative should continue
to make sense without the supplementary support from the metanarrative.**

There are some other metagames that make the connection between the meta- and
the non-meta narratives much closer than Undertale's approach: _Inscryption_,
for example, is infamously _nowhere_ like what it appears like on the surface,
and to summarize its overarching narrative would take up even more words for an
article that issupposed to critique metagames that are _dissimilar_ to it. But
much like all games from Daniel Mullins Games, like _Pony Island_ and _The Hex_,
there _is_ still a game beneath the metagame. I've talked to critics who
actually enjoyed the card game mechanics of _Inscryption_, and evidently many
people feel the same way, judging by the fact that the developer later added an
endless mode called _Kaycee's Mod_, where players can just play the base card
game over and over again without worrying about the meta layer that the base
game relies on considerably heavily. In this sense, although you _cannot_ talk
about _Inscryption_ without mentioning its meta elements like _Undertale_, as
the gameplay and narrative are simply married too deeply to them, there is still
a very solid game beneath the meta fluff with an addicting primary gameplay loop
and well fleshed-out mechanics, much like how _Undertale_ is still an incredibly
innovative spin on the random-encounter RPG format, combining bullet-hell
elements, tactical spellcasting and even involves the player deducing which
spell would be adequate to dispel the enemy in front of them. **The game should
be fun, even without the meta elements.**

Some games, however, break all three aforementioned observations of what makes a
metagame fun. A certain genre of games, in fact, base all of their gameplay,
structure, and even _themes_ around the metanarrative, in a way that undermines
its actual utility as a video game. _Video games are supposed to be fun, after
all._ (There are some games that deliberately disagree, like _Scorn_ \*cough\*,
but those are thankfully in the minority.) Remember: the meta elements are the
_condiments_, the _garnish_ that are supposed to assist the game itself, not
completely replace the game as the sole form of interactive media. Imagine a
game where you have to close a popup every few seconds to progress. That's not a
game — that is a nuisance.

And this is where I'm going to shed the background and comparisons to other
games, and specifically talk about the example I have for a _bad_ metagame:
_OneShot_. _OneShot_, in summary, is a game that is designed entirely in service
of its metanarrative. The core gameloop (if one that can even be adequately
described), revolves around navigating the protagonist, Niko, through levels
littered with puzzles of various kinds, in order to get to their destination.
The puzzles elicit a wide range of emotions, ranging from boring, frustrating,
monotonous to completely illogical. You have the bog standard fetch quests (yes,
plural: there are multiple of them); "turn lights on and off" style puzzles;
puzzles that require assembling items together, puzzles that are _**designed**_
to be _only_ solvable via trial-and-error (to the designer who made the fucking
lab color puzzle: I hope you feel _very_ clever now for making something whose
sole purpose is to literally only waste your players' precious time, which could
range from a few minutes to _literal_ hours); and of course, puzzles that are
impossible to solve without the involvement of the metanarrative.

_OneShot_ takes the sarcastic critique "oooh, the video game knows it's a video
game", takes it at face value, and makes it the primary way of delivering its
metanarrative. It literally opens a popup saying that it knows that **YOU**,
**YOU** the player is there, and it wants to talk to **YOU**. Niko often
addresses **YOU** directly, delivering their lines while staring at the camera
during cutscenes. Now, metagames that directly address the player are not rare.
_There Is No Game: Wrong Dimension_ (or just _There Is No Game_ from now on),
for instance, is a prime example of this. The whole game is structured around
the central conflict between the Player and the Game, who ardently refuses to
let the Player play the "game", devolving into increasingly more elaborate
measures that obstruct the Player from accessing "the game", while the _reason_
behind the Game's refusal is slowly revealed via assisting characters.

However, the reason why _There Is No Game_ succeeded and why _OneShot_ failed as
a metagame, is that ironically it is a much better game. The point-and-click
adventure format may be somewhat old-fashioned, but the creative thought that
went behind the puzzles is truly unique and inspired, and most importantly is
_self-contained_: it does not see a need for abruptly opening up a popup window
for the user to react to, as the game interface itself already allows the player
to interact with the puzzles directly. In that way it does not break immersion,
and it is fully self-consistent in that yes, this is a fourth-wall breaking
narrative, but it embraces that premise. _OneShot_, on the other hand, struggles
to balance between its metanarrative and its properties as a video game, and as
a result it failed in both aspects.

One of the most egregious puzzles _OneShot_ presents to the player is a on-off
light puzzle where you have to turn on and off certain lights. However, unlike
the similar ice puzzle from _Undertale_, you don't get any hints as to what the
solution could be. There's nothing to deduce from, and there's nothing inside
the game screen that shows what the solution could be. How do you know what the
pattern is then? You look behind the game window, and peek at your desktop
wallpaper. Now, I don't know about you, but I find that highly disturbing but
also just unnecessary. Why is a game suddenly granted permission to alter my
desktop background? It could be displaying something truly horrible and
disturbing as far as I can tell, or act like ransomware that turn my screen
entirely black with all my desktop contents gone, aside from the game window
itself. Sure, in this instance it turned out to be very benign and it would
switch back to your original wallpaper when the puzzle has been solved, but it
still unsettles me very deeply. (Perhaps it would have been less terrifying in
2014, when the game came out.)

Shifting away from a technical perspective and into a game design one, the
design of this puzzle was also highly unnecessary and downright repetitive.
Unlike some other on-off light puzzles where adjacent lights are turned on and
off when you activate one light, requiring some logic deduction and thinking on
behalf of the player, the puzzle in _OneShot_ is entirely linear: pressing the
button only toggles the button itself and nothing else. Therefore, from a
mechanical standpoint, once the answer has been "cleverly" revealed, there is no
further thinking or engagement from the player aside from robotically flipping
switches on and off, which means that the sole source of fun or engagement is
the process of discovering the wallpaper hint itself. This shows a complete
clumsiness when it comes to designing puzzles and an overreliance on what is
essentially a _gimmick_ to support the entire segment. Without the wallpaper
gimmick, the puzzle itself is purely manual labor, meaning that the whole
_value_ of the puzzle hinges on these meta-level tricks that the game loves to
pull and are barely hinted at throughout the game. Many other examples like this
sort of _gimmick_ puzzle design also exist, such as requiring users to dig
through a file in their home directory to enter a passcode, or requiring users
to find a secret executable also located in their home directory, which obscures
parts of the game screen that can instruct the player where to go in a maze.
(Again, not a fan of a game that just dumps random files into my home directory,
but maybe it was more acceptable back then.)

All of these puzzles, the backbone of _OneShot's_ core gameplay loop, are
composed of tired puzzle archetypes plus some meta elements that usually
involve, for lack of a better term, directly fucking around with your computer.
Not only does this get old after once or twice, but it _distracts_ the level
designer and puzzlemaker from actually coming up with challenging and
thoughtprovoking puzzles. That, I think, is the biggest crime of the _gimmick_:
it makes people dependent on them, unable to come up with solutions that work
without them. It makes the game designer feel _clever_, while completely
ignoring the reality of how a player would perceive them. Once the player saw
through the gimmicks, they'd come to realize that the puzzles are extremely
shallow and mechanically uninteresting, bordering on wasting people's time. (Or
in the case of the lab color puzzle, _intentionally_ and _directly_ wasting
people's time. God I fucking hate that puzzle.) This is a direct consequence of
making the metanarrative first and stuffing a game inside of it, completely
opposite of the game being created first with the metanarrative in service of
it, which is what the correct order should be.

What's worse is that the player's gaming experience is directly and negatively
impacted by these sorts of metanarrative decisions, inconvenienced by all the
contrivances that are there only to show the user how "meta" the game is.
_OneShot_ is an objectively worse game than it should have been, precisely
because it is too in love with its premise. In the pursuit thereof, the
developers forgot that there should have been an enjoyable game that serves as
the foundation of whichever grand narrative they were initially aiming for,
which is a shame, really. I really liked the art style and the portrayal of Niko
as a protagonist — there is a reason why they're so popular as the subject of
fan arts and other fanmade creations, because the interaction between them and
the player is ultimately heartwarming and heartbreaking at the same time. That
story should have been the core of this game. That relationship should have been
the focus of the game's narrative and mechanics. All the metanarrative fluff
should only serve as supplementary material that add to the game's narrative and
themes, instead of distracting both the player and the developers from them.

There's an idiomatic saying, or _chengyu_ in Chinese, called 「喧宾夺主」: most
literally meaning to have a guest's voice overtake the host's in a feast —
figuratively taken to mean that something secondary has erroneously surpassed
the primary focus in terms of importance and priority. Another _chengyu_,
「本末倒置」, describes a tree whose roots and branches have switched places —
metaphorically taken to mean that the priority had been unduly reversed between
what is supposed to most important, and what is to be less important. I think
both sayings describe the error of _OneShot_ quite succinctly. It did not show
the narrative restraint of _Undertale_, the solid foundation of _Inscryption_,
nor the completely self-aware attitude of _There Is No Game_. What we have is a
jumbled mess of a game which is trying to be clever on a meta-level, while
simultaneously attempting to be an emotional, deeply personal tale, while also
being an engaging puzzle game. The end product is one that fumbles in all three
aspects. Let it be a cautionary tale for any aspiring game developer who wants
to incorporate meta elements into their stories: _don't make the meta overshadow
the core._
